=== PAGE 1 ===
2416 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2022
Graph Convolutional Adversarial Networks for
Spatiotemporal Anomaly Detection
Leyan Deng ,D e f uL i a n , Zhenya Huang , and Enhong Chen , Senior Member , IEEE
Abstract— Trafﬁc anomalies, such as trafﬁc accidents and
unexpected crowd gathering, may endanger public safety if
not handled timely. Detecting trafﬁc anomalies in their early
stage can beneﬁt citizens’ quality of life and city planning.
However, trafﬁc anomaly detection faces two main challenges.
First, it is challenging to model trafﬁc dynamics due to the com-
plex spatiotemporal characteristics of trafﬁc data. Second, the
criteria of trafﬁc anomalies may vary with locations and times.
In this article, we propose a spatiotemporal graph convolutional
adversarial network (STGAN) to address these above challenges.
More speciﬁcally, we devise a spatiotemporal generator to predict
the normal trafﬁc dynamics and a spatiotemporal discriminator
to determine whether an input sequence is real or not. There are
high correlations between neighboring data points in the spatial
and temporal dimensions. Therefore, we propose a recent module
and leverage graph convolutional gated recurrent unit (GCGRU)
to help the generator and discriminator learn the spatiotemporal
features of trafﬁc dynamics and trafﬁc anomalies, respectively.
After adversarial training, the generator and discriminator can
be used as detectors independently, where the generator models
the normal trafﬁc dynamics patterns and the discriminator
provides detection criteria varying with spatiotemporal features.
We then design a novel anomaly score combining the abilities of
two detectors, which considers the misleading of unpredictable
trafﬁc dynamics to the discriminator. We evaluate our method
on two real-world datasets from New York City and California.
The experimental results show that the proposed method detects
various trafﬁc anomalies effectively and outperforms the state-
of-the-art methods. Furthermore, the devised anomaly score
achieves more robust detection performances than the general
score.
Index Terms— Adversarial learning, anomaly detection, intel-
ligent transportation, spatiotemporal data mining.
Manuscript received December 7, 2020; revised June 24, 2021 and
November 22, 2021; accepted December 11, 2021. Date of publication
January 4, 2022; date of current version June 2, 2022. This work was
supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program
of China under Grant 2020AAA0103800, in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 61976198 and Grant 62022077,
and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
under Grant WK2150110017. (Corresponding author: Defu Lian.)
Leyan Deng is with the School of Data Science, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China (e-mail: dleyan@mail.ustc.edu.cn).
Defu Lian and Enhong Chen are with the School of Data Science, University
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China, and also with the
Y angtze River Delta Information Intelligence Innovation Research Institute,
Wuhu 241000, China (e-mail: liandefu@ustc.edu.cn; cheneh@ustc.edu.cn).
Zhenya Huang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China (e-mail:
huangzhy@ustc.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3136171.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3136171
I. I NTRODUCTION
T
HE rapid progress of the social economy has facili-
tated many people’s lives. However, with the increasing
number of vehicles and population in cities, citizens and
trafﬁc management face many serious trafﬁc problems, such
as trafﬁc congestion, trafﬁc accidents, and unexpected crowd
gathering [1]. Such trafﬁc anomalies may endanger public
safety and stability if not timely handled. For example, on
January 26, 2017, in Harbin, a single trafﬁc accident ﬁnally
caused a serial rear-end collision since the earliest accident was
not detected in time [2]. Therefore, one of the fundamental
issues for trafﬁc managemen t and public safety is to detect
trafﬁc anomalies timely. It has great signiﬁcance from both
manager and citizen perspectives as follows [3].
1) For trafﬁc management, de tecting anomalies timely and
even predicting anomalies are instrumental in preventing
serious accidents from occurri ng. Speciﬁcally, the trafﬁc
management depa rtment can handle s udden accidents
depending on reported locations and improve urban
planning to eliminate accide nt-prone regions [4]–[6].
2) For citizens, detecting and predicting urban anomalies
can beneﬁt citizens’ quality of life [7]. For instance,
detecting trafﬁc anomalies can provide real-time trafﬁc
conditions. Therefore, the citizens can adjust the route
to reduce the travel time and cost.
Nowadays, large-scale sensors and mobile devices have
produced a variety of trafﬁc data, such as taxi trip records and
trafﬁc dynamics data [8]–[10]. When an anomaly happens,
abnormal changes can be found from these data sources.
Therefore, we can detect thes e anomalies listed above with
the help of massive trafﬁc data. However, there are critical
challenges in trafﬁc data mining due to the following issues.
1) Complexity of Trafﬁc Data: Trafﬁc data are inﬂuenced
by many complex factors and present dynamic spa-
tiotemporal features. Moreover, the same change that
occurred in different locations and times may mean
normal or abnormal. For example, it is normal for the
trafﬁc ﬂow of the ofﬁce area to increase in the morning
on weekdays. However, when a similar increase occurs
on weekends or in the recreation area, it represents
abnormal. Therefore, it is challenging and critical to
model the complex factors of trafﬁc dynamics and
anomalies [4], [11], [12].
2) Lack of Reported Trafﬁc Anomalies: The trafﬁc anom-
alies are usually not recorded or critical information is
lacking when recorded. Therefore, most existing works
2162-237X © 2022 I EEE. Personal u se is perm itted, but republication/redistri bution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Politecnico di Torino. Downloaded on August 09,2026 at 09:40:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== PAGE 2 ===
DENG et al. : GRAPH CONVOLUTIONAL ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR SP A TIOTEMPORAL ANOMAL Y DETECTION 2417
are unsupervised, which learns latent features from traf-
ﬁc data to represent normal patterns and then regards
deviating from normal patterns as abnormal. However,
their training goals are to predict or reconstruct, which
will lead to suboptimal anomaly detection performance.
3) Diversity of Trafﬁc Anomalies: There are various kinds
of trafﬁc anomalies in the real world, which presents
different patterns in trafﬁc data. For instance, social
events such as concerts would cause a sharp increase
in trafﬁc ﬂow within several hours [13], [14]. On the
contrary, trafﬁc accidents w ould cause a sharp decrease
in trafﬁc speed. In addition, trafﬁc anomalies are affected
by many factors. For example, the trafﬁc ﬂow of the
road under construction would decrease. However, the
adjacent roads may have trafﬁc ﬂow increase since most
people change driving paths. Therefore, the criteria to
determine trafﬁc anomalies should vary with spatiotem-
poral features.
To address these issues, we propose a trafﬁc anomaly
detection method based on spatiotemporal graph convolutional
adversarial network (STGAN). First, to capture the complex
spatiotemporal dependencies of trafﬁc data, we propose a
spatiotemporal generator to predict the normal trafﬁc dynam-
ics. Speciﬁcally, considering the high correlations between
neighboring data in spatial and temporal dimensions, the
main component of the generator is the recent module, which
aims at learning short-term spatiotemporal features. The other
components are devised to learn long-term temporal features
and external features, respectively. Second, we propose a
spatiotemporal discriminator to provide a criterion varying
with locations and times. Furthermore, to solve the lack of
labeled data in trafﬁc anomaly detection works, the generator
generated fake negative data to help the training of the discrim-
inator. Therefore, after adversarial training, both the generator
and the discriminator are able to detect trafﬁc anomalies.
Finally, we design a novel anomaly score to combine the
detection abilities of two com ponents. The mai n contributions
of this article are as follows.
1) We propose an STGAN for trafﬁc anomaly detection.
The generator aims to model the normal trafﬁc patterns,
consisting of three components to learn spatiotemporal
features, historical trend feat ures, and external features.
The discriminator determines whether an input sequence
is real or fake, that is, normal or abnormal. After
adversarial training, the gen erator and the discriminator
can be independently used as detectors.
2) We devise a ﬂexible anomaly score combining the
detection performances of the generator and the dis-
criminator. The anomaly sco re magniﬁes the difference
between the normal and abnormal data by considering
the unpredictability of trafﬁc dynamics. The effective-
ness of the proposed anomaly score is demonstrated in
the experiments.
3) We conduct extensive experiments on the NYC urban
ﬂow dataset and California freeway dataset. The
experimental results show that the proposed STGAN
outperforms three types of baselines, including indi-
vidual methods, temporal methods, and spatiotemporal
methods. We also conduct the ablation experiments and
prediction performance comparison.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. We ﬁrst
present the related work regarding trafﬁc anomaly detection
and GAN-based methods in Section II. Then, we preprocess
and analyze the two real-world datasets in Section III. Some
preliminary deﬁnitions and an overview of our framework are
presented in Section IV. Sections V and VI introduce the
spatiotemporal generator and discriminator in detail and then
introduce a novel anomaly score. We evaluate our method on
two real-world datasets in Section VII and conclude this work
in Section VIII.
II. R
ELA TED WORK
With the rapid growth of sensors and mobile devices, there
are a variety of trafﬁc data. In recent years, mining trafﬁc data
to detect trafﬁc anomalies has attracted extensive attention.
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the existing works in trafﬁc
anomaly detection and then present the anomaly detection
methods based on generative adversarial networks.
A. Trafﬁc Anomaly Detection
In recent years, there have been many new works proposed
for trafﬁc anomaly detection problems. The existing works can
be classiﬁed into four main groups, including spatiotemporal
feature-based, statistical models, tensor factorization-based,
and deep learning models [2].
1) Spatiotemporal Feature-Based Model: Spatiotemporal
feature-based methods transform the trafﬁc anomaly detection
problem into a classical anomaly detection problem via con-
structing or learning features from trafﬁc data [3], [15]–[20].
It is hard for constructed features to capture the complex spa-
tial and temporal correlations of trafﬁc data. In order to obtain
effective spatiotemporal features, many representation learning
methods are proposed. For example, Wang et al. [19] detected
trafﬁc anomalies using the change of road segments’ features.
Ya n get al. [20] introduced a Bayesian RPCA method cofac-
torizing multiple trafﬁc data streams to learn the latent low-
rank and sparse matrices from the trafﬁc data with different
measurements. Zhang et al. [3] used a similarity-based algo-
rithm to estimate anomaly scores based on the historically
similar region and then leveraged a one-class support vector
machine (OC-SVM) to give the integrated anomaly score
for each region. For spatiotemporal feature-based methods,
disjointed anomaly detection a nd feature extraction may lead
to suboptimal detection performance. In this article, we learn
an end-to-end anomaly detectio n discriminator, which learns
a ﬂexible anomaly score based on spatiotemporal features.
2) Statistical Model: Statistical models are also commonly
used in trafﬁc anomaly detection [21]–[25]. These works
model the normal trafﬁc dynami cs with a probability distrib-
ution and then provide the probability as anomaly scores. For
instance, Y ang and Liu [24] denoted an observation as a vector
representing the number of people in every zone at each time.
Then, they applied the K-means clustering technique to group
the observation vectors into K clusters. The historical data
were used to train hidden Markov model (HMM) to model the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Politecnico di Torino. Downloaded on August 09,2026 at 09:40:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== PAGE 3 ===
2418 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2022
observation in each cluster. The anomaly score can be deﬁned
as the probability of a new observation sequence. Similarly,
Witayangkurn et al. [25] clustered the observation vectors and
deﬁned anomaly scores for each observation instead of the
observation sequence. However, these statistical models do not
consider the impact of complex factors on trafﬁc data, such as
weather and time. In this article, we propose an independent
module to capture the external features.
3) T ensor Factorization-Based Model: Due to the scarcity
and complexity of abnormal data, most of the existing works
learn normal trafﬁc patterns of trafﬁc data and then regard the
data point deviating from the normal patterns as anomalies.
In tensor factorization-based methods, the trafﬁc dynamic is
considered as a combination of some types of basic patterns.
These patterns can be learne d by applying restricted ten-
sor factorization techniques on tensor-represented trafﬁc data
[26]–[30]. Lin et al. [28] applied nonnegative CP decom-
position to daily urban ﬂow data to extract basic mobility
patterns. During testing, they used basic trained patterns to
optimize spatial factor vectors and then applied the local
outlier factor (LOF) algorithm to historical spatial factor
vectors of each region to detect abnormal regions for one day.
Chen et al. [29] used the social activity tensor to decompose
the crowd movement tensor into several basic patterns. Then,
based on multiple outlier detection, they detected anomalies
from the basic patterns and used them to detect and describe
associated abnormal events. Similarly, Wang et al. [30] pro-
posed a neighbor-regularized and context-aware tensor fac-
torization method, which focuses on spatial, temporal, and
spatiotemporal patterns. These tensor factorization-based mod-
els only learn the spatial features from history trafﬁc data
and ignore the high spatial correlations between neighboring
regions. In this article, w e introduce a recent module to
capture the high correlations of spatial neighbors.
4) Deep Learning Model: In recent years, deep neural net-
works have achieved great success in learning representations
of complex data, such as high-dimensional data, temporal data,
and spatial data. Some recent works applied deep learning on
trafﬁc anomaly detection to model complex trafﬁc dynamics.
Trinh et al. [31] utilized long short-term memory (LSTM)
neural network to capture long-term temporal dependencies
from multivariate time series. Then, the anomaly detection
problem was addressed as a binary classiﬁcation problem,
and the designed algorithm was used to classify the trafﬁc
sequences as normal or abnormal. Trinh et al. [31] needed
enough abnormal data to train the classiﬁcation model. How-
ever, the labeled data are scarce in the case of trafﬁc anomaly
detection. Zhang et al. [32] proposed a decomposition method
that decomposes urban dynamics into normal and abnormal
components. They designed a geoembedding method to learn
ﬁxed spatial features. The normal component was learned
via a neural network based on the ﬁxed spatial features and
handcrafted temporal features. Then, the LOF algorithm was
utilized to the abnormal component to achieve the ﬁnal anom-
aly score. However, these existing works modeled temporal
features only or modeled the spatial and temporal feature
separately, which are not able to model the trafﬁc dynamics
well.
In our work, we capture the dynamic spatiotemporal features
of trafﬁc data from multiple data sources. We consider the
high correlations of trafﬁc data in the spatial and temporal
dimensions. We do not only use the difference between the
normal pattern and real trafﬁc dynamic as anomaly score but
also propose a discriminator to detect trafﬁc anomalies based
on spatiotemporal features. Then, we design a ﬂexible anomaly
score for robust detection performance.
B. Generative Adversarial-Based Anomaly Detection
GAN-based [33] models emerged quickly as one of the
popular deep anomaly detection approaches after it was pro-
posed [34]. One of the early methods is the AnoGAN [35]
for image anomaly detection. The generator generated the
realistic instance based on learned latent features of normal
instances. The anomaly score was deﬁned by the similarity
between the real instance and g enerated instance. One main
limitation of AnoGAN is the computational inefﬁciency in the
iterative search of the latent feature. Akcay et al. [36] further
improved the generator by changing the generator network to
an encoder–decoder–encoder network. The search of the latent
feature was formalized as an encoder.
The above methods are all applied in image anomaly
detection. Moreover, GAN-based anomaly detection meth-
ods are also proposed for video data or time-series data.
For instance, Li et al. [37] proposed a multivariate time-
series anomaly detection framework. This work modeled the
complex multivariate correlations by considering the entire
variable set concurrently. Then, they devised an anomaly score
using discriminant result and reconstruction. Lee et al. [38]
focused on abnormal detection in videos. They devised a
generator based on bidirectional ConvLSTM to generate an
interframe by considering spatiotemporal characteristics. The
discriminator consisted of 3-D convolutional layers to deter-
mine whether the video sequence was real or not. Then, they
devised an anomaly score by using the losses of the genera-
tor and the discriminator. Ravanbakhsh et al. [39] addressed
the abnormality detection problem in crowded scenes. They
proposed a GAN-based method consisting of two condi-
tional GANs. The local difference between the real and the
generated images was considered as an anomaly score at
testing time.
In time-series data, we do not need to consider spatial fea-
tures. In video data, each video frame contains similar spatial
features, and there are high correlations between consecutive
frames. However, in trafﬁc data, there are dynamic correlations
between different locations, and in addition to the correlations
between neighboring times, the trafﬁc dynamics present a
speciﬁc trend in history. In summary, trafﬁc dynamics are
affected by many complex factors and have more complex
spatiotemporal features than time-series data or video data.
Therefore, these GAN-based a nomaly detection methods can-
not be applied in detecting trafﬁc anomalies directly. In this
article, we propose a novel spatiotemporal adversarial network.
The proposed generator simultaneously captures the dynamic
spatial and temporal feature, and the discriminator detects
anomalies at different times and locations.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Politecnico di Torino. Downloaded on August 09,2026 at 09:40:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== PAGE 4 ===
DENG et al. : GRAPH CONVOLUTIONAL ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR SP A TIOTEMPORAL ANOMAL Y DETECTION 2419
Fig. 1. (a) Sensors in the bay area. (b) Segmented regions in New Y ork City.
III. D ATA S E TANALYSIS
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed spatiotemporal
anomaly detection method based on adversarial networks,
we collect two real-world datasets, namely, urban ﬂow data in
New Y ork City and freeway trafﬁc data in California. In this
section, we describe the details of two datasets and present
preprocessing on the two datasets.
A. Data Collection and Data Preprocessing
1) PeMS Dataset: Caltrans Performance Measurement Sys-
tem (PeMS)
1 provides access to real-time and historical trafﬁc
performance on California freeways. The primary data source
is the vehicle detector stations (VDSs) distributed on free-
way. The coordinates of VDS are also available. We select
365 sensors (VDS) in the bay area visualized in Fig. 1(a).
We collect ﬁve months of data ranging from January 1,
2014 to May 6, 2014. Each record contains the total vol-
umes and average speeds of the corresponding road segments
every 5 min.
We denote a sensor as a node and regard two nodes as
adjacent if two sensors are adjacent on the same freeway.
We preprocess each record as a vector, representing the
respective trafﬁc dynamics of all lanes. Note that the numbers
of lanes in different segments are not equal. We set the number
of lanes as the maximum value 6 and ﬁll the null value by
zero.
2) NYC Dataset: The NYC dataset [1], [40] contains taxi-
cab data
2 and bike renting data 3 in New Y ork City. We collect
these two datasets and weather data 4 of NYC from January 15,
2014 to November 30, 2014. Each trip record includes arrival
and departure times an d locations, and especially, the number
of passengers is also available in NYC taxicab data.
We use major roads to partition the entire city, which
results in 862 regions shown in Fig. 1(b). We denote each
region as a node and consider two nodes adjacent if their
boundaries are connected. Then, we divide each day into time
slots of 30 min. For each region, we compute the number of
leaving trips and arriving trips of taxi and bike during each
time slot, respectively. Table I summarizes the statistics of the
preprocessed datasets.
1http://pems.dot.ca.gov/
2https://www1.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page
3http://www.citibikenyc.com/system-data
4https://tianqi.911cha.com/
TABLE I
DESCRIPTION OF PREPROCESSED DA TASETS
Fig. 2. Trafﬁc ﬂows on May 13, 2014 and the same day of last week. (a) Taxi
inﬂow, the dotted line indicates the start time of the concert. (b) Taxi outﬂow,
the dotted line indicates the end time of the concert.
B. Empirical Study
In this section, we conduct empirical studies on two real-
world datasets to visualize how different types of trafﬁc
anomalies affect the trafﬁc data. Then, we summarize the
characteristics of trafﬁc anomalies.
1) Lady Gaga Concert in NYC: On May 13, 2014, Lady
Gaga held a concert in Madison Square Garden, which started
at 8:00 and ended at 10:00. Fig. 2 shows the taxi ﬂows on
that day and the same day last week. As shown in Fig. 2(a),
the audiences arrive one after another before the concert and
then cause a signiﬁcant inﬂow in crease compared to last week.
Fig. 2(b) shows that the audiences leave this stadium after the
concert, presenting opposite trafﬁc dynamics from last week.
In summary, social events usually present as sharp changes in
trafﬁc ﬂow within several hours.
2) Lane Closure in California: In the real world, the road
is often closed due to road construction. Fig. 3 shows the
trafﬁc speeds during two days, which contains trafﬁc dynamics
change after lane closure. As shown in Fig. 3, the average
speed decreases sharply after starting construction. However,
under normal circumstances, the average speed should reach a
peak due to the low trafﬁc volume in the middle of the night.
Furthermore, the average speeds have a signiﬁcant increase
compared to the normal sequence after ﬁnishing construction.
Namely, such trafﬁc problem usually impacts the speed ﬁrst
and then causes a signiﬁcant difference from normal.
In summary, both urban events and trafﬁc incidents have
direct inﬂuences on trafﬁc da ta. However, the impacts of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Politecnico di Torino. Downloaded on August 09,2026 at 09:40:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== PAGE 5 ===
2420 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2022
Fig. 3. Trafﬁc speed during two days and the same days of next week. The
lane was closed every night from 22:00 to 5:00 for construction. The black
dotted line indicates the end time of construction, and the red line indicates
the start time.
Fig. 4. (a) Graph-structured trafﬁc network. (b) Trafﬁc dynamics of a node
on the PeMS dataset. Here, the trafﬁc data are normalized to [−1, 1].
trafﬁc anomalies depend on lo cation, time, and type of trafﬁc
anomaly. Therefore, it is nece ssary to design a ﬂexible and
conditional criterion for detecting trafﬁc anomalies. In this
work, we propose a spatiotemporal discriminator, which deter-
mines whether a data point is abnormal or not depending
on its neighbors in spatial and temporal dimensions instead
of itself. The discriminator provides a criterion varying with
locations and times, which conforms to the characteristics of
trafﬁc anomalies in the real world.
IV . O
VERVIEW
In this section, we introduce basic deﬁnitions and an
overview of our framework.
A. Preliminaries
1) Trafﬁc Network: In this study, we deﬁne a trafﬁc network
as a weighted directed graph G = (V, E, W) as shown
in Fig. 4(a), where V is a ﬁnite set of N nodes; E is a
set of edges, indicating the connectivity between the nodes;
and W ∈ RN×N denotes the weighted adjacency matrix
of graph G, representing the spatial correlations between
connected nodes. We use a thresholded Gaussian kernel [41]
to build the adjacency matrix. The edge weight between nodes
v
i and v j is deﬁned as
Wij =
⎧
⎨⎨
⎨⎩
exp

− dist

vi ,v j
2
σ 2
	
, i = j and ei, j = 1
0, otherwise
(1)
where dist (vi ,v j ) denotes the distance from node vi to
node v j , σ is the standard deviation of distances, eij represents
Fig. 5. (a) Subgraph of the central region. (b) Heat map of correlations
between the central dark region and other regions.
the edge between nodes vi and v j ,a n d ei, j = 1i f vi and v j
are adjacent and otherwise 0.
2) Trafﬁc Dynamic: Denote the set of time slices as T and
|T |= T . Thus, each data point can be denoted as a triple tuple
s = v, t, xv,t ,w h e r ev ∈ V, t ∈ T ,a n d xv,t ∈ RF represents
the trafﬁc dynamic of node v at time t. In the NYC dataset,
the trafﬁc dynamics represent the inﬂows and the outﬂows of
taxis and bikes. In the PeMS dataset, the trafﬁc dynamics
represent the total volume and the average speed of each lane.
For example, Fig. 4(b) shows a trafﬁc dynamics sequence of
a node on the PeMS dataset.
3) Subgraph: There exist high correlations between neigh-
boring locations in the spatial dimension. Fig. 5(b) shows the
heatmap of the correlations in the NYC dataset. The central
dark region is the object region; the color depths represent
the correlations between the object region and other regions.
We can ﬁnd that trafﬁc dynamics of nearby areas are more
relevant than ones of distant nodes. Therefore, we model the
trafﬁc dynamics of a data point s by considering its neighbors.
As shown in Fig. 5(a), the node in red is object node v,
and nodes in blue are its neighboring nodes. We denote the
subgraph of node v as G
v = (Vv, Ev, Wv),w h e r eVv consists
of v and its n−1 nearest nodes. In this article, we set n to 9 for
both two datasets.
4) Trafﬁc Anomaly Detection: Given trafﬁc network G and
historical data S,w h e r e S ∈ RT×N×F denotes the trafﬁc
dynamics of all nodes over T time slices, we aim at identifying
which nodes are abnormal at time T + 1.
B. Framework
Fig. 6 shows our proposed framework for STGAN. Our
framework consists of two components, i.e., the spatiotemporal
generator and the discriminator. As shown in Fig. 6, the
sequence, including the generated trafﬁc dynamics, is con-
sidered as fake ( ˆS
t ), while a real sequence ( St ) contains
only real trafﬁc dynamics. Through adversarial learning, the
spatiotemporal discriminator learns to classify whether the
input sequence is real or not. The generator learns to predict
trafﬁc dynamics, which can fool the discriminator. We will
introduce the framework in detail in the following.
V. S
P A TIOTEMPORAL GENERA TOR
In this section, we introduce the architecture of the gen-
erator in detail. It consists of three independent modules,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Politecnico di Torino. Downloaded on August 09,2026 at 09:40:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== PAGE 6 ===
DENG et al. : GRAPH CONVOLUTIONAL ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR SP A TIOTEMPORAL ANOMAL Y DETECTION 2421
Fig. 6. Framework of STGAN. Left: spatiotemporal generator. Right: spatiotemporal discriminator.
Fig. 7. (a) Temporal dependencies. (b ) Spatial dependencies between two
nodes. The top part is a pair adjacent nodes and the bottom part is a pair of
distant nodes.
including the recent, trend, an d external modules, to model
the spatiotemporal, trend, and external features. In the end,
the outputs of three modules are further merged based on a
graph convolution network (GCN) layer to obtain the ﬁnal
prediction result.
A. Recent Module
The recent module is proposed to capture the high correla-
tions between trafﬁc dynamics of neighboring data points in
the spatial and temporal dimensions concurrently. It consists
of a graph convolutional gated recurrent unit (GCGRU) [42]
layer and a fully connected layer.
We visualize the real trafﬁc dynamics to demonstrate the
high correlations between neighbors in the spatial and tem-
poral dimensions in Fig. 7. Fig. 7(a) shows the average ratio
curves using the NYC dataset, where the x-axis indicates the
time gap and the y-axis indicates the average ratio between
two taxi inﬂows having the corresponding time gap. It can be
seen that the trafﬁc dynamics of recent time intervals are more
relevant than ones of distant time intervals. Fig. 7(b) compares
the time series of one node with its adjacent node and distant
node using the PeMS dataset. We can ﬁnd that the adjacent
nodes have similar trafﬁc dynamics, and the distant nodes have
two distinct trafﬁc dynamics.
1) Recent Segment: In this article, we capture spatiotem-
poral dependencies in trafﬁc data by introducing a recent
segment. We use T
r to denote the length of the input of
the recent module. Thus, assuming that the current time is t,
the recent segment of the data point s = v, t, xv,t  can be
formulated as follows :
X r = Xv,t−Tr , Xv,t−Tr +1,..., Xv,t−1
 ∈ RTr ×n×F (2)
where Xv,t ={ xvi ,t|vi ∈ Gv} denotes the trafﬁc dynamics of
the subgraph of node v during time interval t.
2) Graph Convolutional Gated Recurrent Unit: In this
article, we denote a trafﬁc network as a weighted directed
graph. The standard convolution for the image or regular
grids cannot be directly applicable to graph structure [43].
Therefore, we leverage spectral graph theory, which gen-
eralizes the traditional convolution operation to the graph
structure data. Given a graph G = (V, E, W),l e t L =
I − D
−(1/2) WD −(1/2) ∈ RN×N denote the graph Laplacian
matrix, where I is an identity matrix and D is the degree
matrix. Then, a graph convolution operation can be deﬁned as
g ∗G X = relu

LX g + bg

(3)
where ∗G denotes a graph convolution operation and g and
bg are learnable parameters.
In order to model spatial and temporal dependencies con-
currently, we devise the recent module, which mainly consists
of the GCGRU [42]. The GCGRU replaces the matrix multi-
plications in gated recurrent unit (GRU) [44] with the graph
convolution, and then, the GCGRU can be deﬁned as follows :
r
(t) = σ

r ∗G

X(t), Ht−1
+ br

u(t) = σ u ∗G

X(t), Ht−1 + bu

C(t) = tanhC ∗G

X(t), r(t) Ht−1 + bc

H(t) = u(t) H(t−1) + 1 − u(t) C(t) (4)
where X(t) and H(t) denote the input and output at time t,
respectively, r(t) and u(t) are reset gate and update gate
at time t, respectively, ∗G denotes the graph convolution
deﬁned in (3), and r , u, C, br , bu, and bc are learnable
parameters [45].
B. Trend Module
As visualized in Fig. 7, the spatiotemporal features of data
points are more relevant to the short-term trafﬁc dynamics.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Politecnico di Torino. Downloaded on August 09,2026 at 09:40:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== PAGE 7 ===
2422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2022
Fig. 8. Taxi inﬂows during weekend and weekday.
Fig. 9. Taxi inﬂows during normal days and rainy day in the same region.
Therefore, the generator lear ns the spatiotemporal features
only depending on the recent segment deﬁned in (2). Then, the
trend module aims at learning the long-term temporal features.
We use T
h to denote the input length of the trend segment.
Thus, assuming that the current time is t, the trend segment
can be formulated as follows :
X h =

xv,t−Th , xv,t−Th +1,..., xv,t−1

∈ RTh ×F. (5)
The trend module contains an LSTM layer and a fully
connected layer. By the LSTM layer, the trend of trafﬁc data
of each node can be learned.
C. External Module
The external module is proposed to learn how external
feature affects trafﬁc data. As shown in Fig. 6, the external
module consists of a fully connected layer, which takes the
external features as input.
Trafﬁc ﬂows can be affected by many complex external
factors, such as time and weather. First, we consider the effect
of time factors. Fig. 8 shows taxi inﬂow during eight days in
NYC. It can be seen that the trafﬁc ﬂows show similar trends
every day. For instance, the trafﬁc ﬂow decreases sharply at
midnight and increases in the morning. Moreover, the trafﬁc
ﬂows on weekdays show different trends from weekends.
Second, we consider the effect of weather factors. Fig. 9
presents taxi inﬂow during two weeks, and the weather of
one day is rain. We ﬁnd that bad weather causes a sharp
decrease compared to the same day of next week. In this
article, we represent the external feature as follows :
E = 
O
weekday; Ohour; Oweather
 (6)
where Oweekday is a one-hot vector of length 7 representing
the day of week, Ohour is a one-hot vector of length 24 that
shows which hour it is in a day, and Oweather is also a one-hot
vector denoting the weather. Some incidents on the freeway
are caused by bad weather. Therefore, we do not consider
weather features on the PeMS dataset.
D. Fusion
For each data point s = v, t, xv,t , the goal of the
generator is to predict the trafﬁc dynamics of subgraph Gv ,
that is, Xv . Its three modules aim at learning the short-term
spatiotemporal feature, long-term temporal feature, and the
external feature of s, respectively. Due to the high correlations
between adjacent nodes, the spatial feature of node v can be
used to reconstruct the trafﬁc dynamics of subgraph Gv via a
GCN layer. The ﬁnal prediction of s can be deﬁned as follows :
ˆXv,t = tanh(F ∗G [X R, X T , X E, ]) (7)
where ∗G denotes the graph convolution deﬁned in (3) and
X R, X T , and X E denote the outputs of t he recent module, the
trend module, and the external module, respectively.
E. Loss Function
Let Gθ and Dφ denote the generator function with para-
meter θ and the discriminator function with parameter φ,
respectively. To generate rea listic instances, we design a loss
function composed of prediction error and discriminator loss,
which can be formulated as follows :
LG(θ) =

s
− log1 − Dφ
 ˆSv,t
 + λGGθ (v, t) − Xv,t 2
(8)
where ˆSv,t ={ Xv,t−Tr , Xv,t−Tr +1,..., ˆXv,t−1} denotes the fake
sequence and λG is a hyperparameter to balance the prediction
error and the discriminator loss. By minimizing the two parts,
the generator will generate r ealistic instances, which can fool
the discriminator.
VI. S P A TIOTEMPORAL DISCRIMINA TOR
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the structure of the dis-
criminator in detail and then propose a ﬂexible anomaly score
to combine the detection perfo rmance of the generator and the
discriminator. The spatiotemporal discriminator consists of a
GCN layer and a GCGRU layer to model the spatial features at
the current time and the spatiotem poral features, respectively.
In the end, the outputs of two modules are merged based on
a fully connected layer to obtain the classiﬁcation result.
A. Spatiotemporal Discriminator
As shown in Fig. 6, the GCN layer deﬁned in (3) is
used to capture the spatial features at the current time. The
structure of the GCGRU layer deﬁned in (4) is used to
learn the spatiotemporal features from the recent segment,
which is similar to the generator component. Finally, the fully
connected layer uses sigmoid as the activation function and
outputs anomaly scores in [0, 1] for each input sequence. Note
that the scores of anomalies are 1 and vice versa are 0.
To distinguish the real sequence from the fake sequence,
we design an adversarial loss. By minimizing the loss, the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Politecnico di Torino. Downloaded on August 09,2026 at 09:40:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== PAGE 8 ===
DENG et al. : GRAPH CONVOLUTIONAL ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR SP A TIOTEMPORAL ANOMAL Y DETECTION 2423
discriminator can identify whether the input sequence is real
or not. The loss function can be written as
LD(φ) =

s
−log

Dφ
 ˆSv,t

− log

1 − Dφ

Sv,t

(9)
where Sv,t ={ Xv,t−Tr , Xv,t−Tr +1,..., Xv,t−1, Xv,t } and
ˆSv,t ={ Xv,t−Tr , Xv,t−Tr +1,..., Xv,t−1, ˆXv,t } are the real and
fake sequences, respectively.
During the adversarial training, the discriminator can pro-
mote the learning of the generat or and train with the generated
negative data. After the end, the discriminator can be used as
a detector.
B. Anomaly Score
Next, we need to deﬁne an anomaly score to detect
anomalies. As we said before, both the generator and the
discriminator can be used as detectors independently. For the
generator, the anomaly score can be designed as a prediction
error, which detects the anomalies with sudden changes in
trafﬁc data. For the discriminator, the output can be used as the
anomaly score directly, which detects the anomalies deviating
from spatiotemporal features. Obviously, we can combine the
detection abilities of the se two components [38].
However, at the end of the training, we ﬁnd that the gener-
ator can generate a realistic instance to fool the discriminator.
Thus, the discriminator cannot determine the generated data
with high conﬁdence. Meanwhile, the trafﬁc data in real world
are affected by various complex factors. Therefore, the real
trafﬁc dynamics would present more unpredictable patterns
than the corresponding generated data regardless of normal or
abnormal. Based on the above ﬁndings, we design a ﬂexible
anomaly score to reduce the impact of the unpredictability of
trafﬁc dynamics. Instead of directly using the discriminator
score of real sequence, we compute the difference value
between the discriminator scores of real and fake sequences.
For a data point s = v, t, x
v,t , the anomaly score can be
written as follows :
sD(v, t) = Dφ

Sv,t

− Dφ
 ˆSv,t

sG(v, t) = Gθ (v, t) − Xv,t 2
score(v, t) = sG(v, t) + λsD(v, t) (10)
where λ is a hyperparameter to balance the generator detection
and the discriminator detection.
VII. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the proposed spatiotemporal
anomaly detection method on two real datasets and compare it
with the existing works, including individual methods, tempo-
ral methods, and spatiotemporal methods. Besides comparing
the detection performances, we also conduct the prediction
performance comparison and ablation experiments.
A. Ground Truth Data
1) PeMS Dataset: The Caltrans PeMS provides California
Highway Patrol (CHP) incident reports and Lane Closure Sys-
tem (LCS) reports. The CHP records the start time, duration,
TABLE II
GROUND TRUTH ON THE PEMS D ATA S E T
location, and type of some trafﬁc incidents that occurred in
real world. 5 The LCS records the start time, end time, start
location, end location, and type of some lane closure incidents.
We collect 458 CHP incident reports and 78 LCS reports from
April 16, 2014 to May 6, 2014. In the experiments, we extend
the end time of each CHP incident by 1 h to include the
impact of the trafﬁc accidents. Note that we do not consider
the weather feature in the external module, so we do not ﬁlter
the incidents cause by weather. The statistics of the ground
truth are summarized in Table II.
2) NYC Dataset: The trafﬁc anomalies in cities are gener-
ally caused by social events. Th erefore, we collect 20 events
from November 1, 2014 to November 30, 2014 as ground
truth.
6 For example, Christmas Tree Lighting, 2017/12/1
18:00-20:00, and Bryant Park denote the description, time,
and location of one record ed event, respectively.
B. Evaluation Metrics
Evaluating anomaly detection in real-world settings is an
open challenge since it is difﬁcult to obtain a complete set
of ground truth. Following the same procedure in previous
work [32], [40], [46], we employ recall to measure the
detection performances. Since the reported incidents are not
a complete set of ground truth in real world, we do not use
precision as the evaluation metric. We represent the set of
real-world anomalies in ground truth as . We mark the data
points given the K % highest anomaly scores as anomalies,
represented by 
K . For each detected anomaly, if a real-world
anomaly spatially and tempora lly overlaps with the detected
anomaly, we consider the detection as a hit. Thus, the recall
is calculated as follows :
Recall@K% = | ∩ K |
|| . (11)
C. Baselines and Settings
To prove the effectiveness of STGAN, we evaluate three
groups of the anomaly detection method, namely, individ-
ual methods, temporal methods, and spatiotemporal methods.
A detailed description of these baselines is illustrated as
follows.
1) Individual Methods: Individual methods (isolation forest
(IF) [47], elliptic envelope (EE) [48], and LOF [49]) and
random forest (RF) [50] detect anomalies from trafﬁc dynam-
ics, ignoring the dependencies between data points. In the
5 https://pems.dot.ca.gov/Transit_PeMS_User Manual_v1.0.pdf
6 https://www.nycinsiderguide.com/
Authorized licensed use limited to: Politecnico di Torino. Downloaded on August 09,2026 at 09:40:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== PAGE 9 ===
2424 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2022
experiments, we train models for each node independently and
then normalize and merge the anomaly scores of all nodes to
decide the ﬁnal anomalies.
1) IF [47] constructs binary trees based on the attributes of
data points to isolate abnormal points. The data points
with the smaller path length in the tree are considered
as anomalies.
2) EE [48] ﬁts the data points with an EE and deﬁnes the
anomaly score as Mahalanobis distance.
3) LOF [49] considers the data points whose local densities
are signiﬁcantly lower than neighbors as anomalies.
4) RF [50] is an ensemble learning method for classiﬁ-
cation. In the experiments, due to the lack of labeled
data during training, we generate the fake labeled data
to transform the unsupervised anomaly detection into a
supervised problem.
2) T emporal Methods: Temporal methods [vector autore-
gressive model (V AR) [51] and preprocessing V AR (pV AR)]
predict trafﬁc dynamics only considering the temporal features
and then regard the prediction error as the anomaly score.
1) V AR [52] is one of the most popular linear models for
time-series forecasting.
2) pV AR applies the V AR model to preprocessed data,
which is decomposed from the trafﬁc data of each node.
3) Spatiotemporal Methods: Spatiotemporal anomaly detec-
tion methods (ST_decompn [32], CIAS&AIAS [3], and
TBAD [28]), include tensor factorization-based, deep learning-
based, and statistical models.
1) ST_decompn [32] is an urban anomaly detection model
based on decomposition. More speciﬁcally, this method
learns the spatial and temporal features separately in
advance, then models the normal trafﬁc patterns using a
deep neural network. The LOF algorithm is applied to
the abnormal components to get ﬁnal anomaly scores.
2) CIAS&AIAS [3] estimates the anomaly score for each
region based on its historically similar regions. Then,
this work leverages OC-SVM to compute the ﬁnal
anomaly score. This method outputs a set of abnormal
data points instead of anomaly scores. Therefore, in the
experiment, we compute the recall and the correspond-
ing anomaly ratio.
3) ASTGCN [53] is a state-of-the-art trafﬁc ﬂow prediction
method. In the experiments, we use ASTGCN to predict
the trafﬁc dynamics instead of trafﬁc ﬂow and deﬁne the
anomaly score as the prediction error.
4) TBAD [28] is a tensor factorization-based method,
which builds up a set of tensors to represent daily trafﬁc
dynamics and then applies nonnegative CP decomposi-
tion on the tensors. During testing, the regions whose
current spatial features deviate from history are regarded
as anomalies. In the experiments, we combine the spa-
tial and temporal feature vectors to represent a data
point and then leverage the LOF algorithm to detect
anomalies.
D. Settings
In the experiments, we use the min-max normalization
method to scale the trafﬁc data into the range [−1, 1].T h e
TABLE III
RECALL @K% ON THE PEMS D ATA S E T
Fig. 10. Recall curve @K% on the PeMS dataset.
hyperparameter λG in (8) is set as 500. For the anomaly score
deﬁned in (10), we normalize sD(v, t) and sG(v, t) and then
set λ = 1. The time length of the recent segment is 1 h
on the PeMS dataset and 2 h on the NYC dataset. We set
a batch size as 256 and use Adam [54] with the learning rate
of 0.001 to train the model. We use the LSTM network with
depth 2 and 64 hidden units for the generator. The GCGRU
networks for the generator and the discriminator use two layers
and 32 hidden units. For all the other parts of the network,
the number of hidden units is set to 64. The source code is
available at https://github.com/dleyan/STGAN.
E. Results
1) PeMS Dataset: For the PeMS dataset, we use the data
of the last 20 days for testing and the others for training. The
baseline CIAS&AIAS detects 1 .5% anomalies and achieves
Recall = 0.10. Table III and Fig. 10, respectively, show the
recalls and recall curves of different methods. It can be seen
that our method STGAN achieves the best performances with
different values of K over recall. In addition, we have some
other ﬁndings.
1) The spatiotemporal methods except for ASTGCN show
better performances than individual methods and tem-
poral methods. These results prove that it is important
to model the spatiotemporal features of trafﬁc data.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Politecnico di Torino. Downloaded on August 09,2026 at 09:40:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== PAGE 10 ===
DENG et al. : GRAPH CONVOLUTIONAL ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR SP A TIOTEMPORAL ANOMAL Y DETECTION 2425
TABLE IV
HIT EVENTS @K% ON THE NYC D ATA S E T
2) The experimental results show that our method outper-
forms the recently proposed ST_decompn. The reason is
that ST_decompn extracts spa tial and temporal features
from historical data separately, which affects the ability
to model trafﬁc dynamics.
3) Our method signiﬁcantly outperforms ASTGCN,
demonstrating that detecting trafﬁc anomalies based on
spatiotemporal features is necessary.
4) The temporal method pV AR improves the performance
of V AR, which validates that trafﬁc data present peri-
odical patterns, and the external module based on time
features is reasonable.
2) NYC Dataset: For the NYC dataset, we use the data
of last month for testing and the others for training. The
baseline CIAS&AIAS detects 1 .0% anomalies and achieves
hit events = 10. Table IV shows the number of hit events
detected by other methods. First, we ﬁnd that STGAN achieves
the highest recall in most cases except for K = 0.2.
Moreover, TBAD only achieves the best performance when
K = 0.2, but the recall improves slowly with the increase
of detected anomalies. Second, the temporal methods show
a similar performance compared to spatiotemporal methods.
One possible reason is that the social event often causes a
sharp increase in urban ﬂow, as shown in Fig. 2. Thus, the
temporal methods based on prediction accuracy can effec-
tively detect abnormal events. Third, ST_decompn achieves
the second-best overall results but presents extremely poor
performance when K = 0.2. The results illustrate that the
anomalies detected by ST_deco mpn with high conﬁdences are
not accurate.
3) Prediction Performance: A common key idea in existing
works is detecting anomalies relying on prediction tasks.
Therefore, we conduct the pred iction accuracy comparison
for the spatiotemporal methods. Note that we only evaluate the
prediction errors of central nodes for the proposed STGAN.
Moreover, limited by the size of the service area of taxis and
bicycles, the NYC dataset is sparse. The missing values in the
PeMS dataset are ﬁlled by zero, also resulting in sparseness.
Therefore, the differences betw een the prediction errors of dif-
ferent generators are not signiﬁcant enough. Table VII shows
TABLE V
GENERA TOR PREDICTION ERROR
TABLE VI
ANOMAL Y SCORE PERFORMANCE
TABLE VII
SPA TIOTEMPORAL METHOD PREDICTION ERROR
the prediction errors on two real-world datasets. As shown in
Table VII, our proposed STGAN achieves the best prediction
performance of these three spatiotemporal methods. Compared
to ASTGCN, our proposed STGAN learns the spatiotemporal
features of data points from their neighbors in spatial and
temporal dimensions, and these neighbors are demonstrated
to be highly correlated with data points, as shown in Fig. 7.
Moreover, the other two methods outperform ST_decompn
signiﬁcantly. The reason is that ST_decompn constructs ﬁxed
spatial features and temporal f eatures in advance. Then, they
merge these features via a neural network. Thus, it cannot
learn the dynamic spatiotemporal features well.
F . Anomaly Score Analysis
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed ﬂexible
anomaly score, we compare th e detection performances with
others in Table VI. Obviously, the proposed anomaly score
achieves the overall best performances. In addition, we have
some other ﬁndings. First, comparing the performances of
s
D(v, t) with D(Sv,t ), we can see the signiﬁcant improve-
ments, which proves that the difference can ﬁx the detection of
a single discriminator score. Second, sG(v, t) performs weaker
than the proposed score (v, t) but better than the state-of-the-
art trafﬁc ﬂow prediction method ASTGCN. The possible
reason is that the proposed generator not only aims at reducing
prediction error but also models the normal trafﬁc patterns.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Politecnico di Torino. Downloaded on August 09,2026 at 09:40:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== PAGE 11 ===
2426 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2022
Fig. 11. Prediction visualization of diffe rent generators. (a) Generator without
trend module. (b) Generator without recent module. (c) Generator without
external module. (d) Proposed generator.
G. Module Analysis
The generator consists of three independent modules.
To demonstrate the necessity of each module, we conduct
prediction comparisons of the generator without different
modules on two real datasets. Note that the goal of the
generator is to predict trafﬁc dynamics of the subgraph, but
we evaluate the prediction p erformances only using central
nodes. It can be seen from Table V that the complete generator
achieves the best prediction p erformances on two datasets.
We further visualize the prediction of the different generators
in Fig. 11. We can ﬁrst observe that the generator without
the recent module is unable to predict trafﬁc dynamics well.
The reason is that the generat or aims at predicting trafﬁc
dynamics of nodes in the subgra ph, and only the recent module
can model the spatial features. Second, the generator can
only learn the long-term from external information. Therefore,
it presents prediction delay and high prediction error during
sudden changes in Fig. 11(a). Similarly, the generator without
the external module also shows delays in prediction. However,
it predicts the sudden changes more accurately. Compared
to the three ablated generators, the proposed generator better
ﬁts the real trafﬁc dynamics and achieves the best prediction
accuracy.
VIII. C
ONCLUSION
With the rapid growth of sensors and mobile devices, there
are a variety of trafﬁc data. The massive trafﬁc data can help
detect abnormal trafﬁc events. In this article, we proposed
a spatiotemporal graph convolutional adversarial framework
called STGAN to detect trafﬁc anomalies. The proposed
generator consists of three modules to model the normal trafﬁc
dynamics patterns. The spatiotemporal generator and discrim-
inator have a similar module using GCGRU. The GCGRU
captures the high correlations between neighboring points in
spatial and temporal dimensions and helps the generator and
the discriminator learn the spa tiotemporal features of trafﬁc
data and trafﬁc anomalies, respectively. Then, we devised
a ﬂexible anomaly score varying with locations and times
for trafﬁc anomaly detection. Evaluations on two real-world
datasets from NYC and California demonstrate that our frame-
work effectively detects tra fﬁc anomalies and outperforms
baselines.
In the future, we plan to extend the proposed discriminator
to classify the categories of trafﬁc anomalies.
R
EFERENCES
[1] Z. Y u, C. Licia, W. Ouri, and Y . Hai, “Urban computing: Concepts,
methodologies, and applications,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. ,
vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1–55, Sep. 2014.
[2] M. Zhang, T. Li, Y . Y u, Y . Li, P . Hui, and Y . Zheng, “Urban anomaly
analytics: Description, de tection and prediction,” IEEE Trans. Big Data ,
early access, Apr. 28, 2020, doi: 10.1109/TBDA TA.2020.2991008.
[3] H. Zhang, Y . Zheng, and Y . Y u, “Detecting urban anomalies using
multiple spatio-temporal data sources,” Proc. ACM Interact., Mobile,
Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–18, Mar. 2018.
[4] Z. Fan, A. Arai, X. Song, A. Witayangkurn, H. Kanasugi, and
R. Shibasaki, “A collaborative ﬁltering approach to citywide human
mobility completion from sparse call records,” in Proc. IJCAI , 2016,
pp. 2500–2506.
[5] C. Chen, D. Zhang, Z.-H. Zhou, N. Li , T. Atmaca, and S. Li, “B-planner:
Night bus route planning using large-scale taxi GPS traces,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Commun. (PerCom) . Mar. 2013,
pp. 225–233.
[6] Melbourne 2030: A Planning Update Melbourne @ 5 Million ,D e p t .
Planning Community Develop., M elbourne, VIC, Australia, 2008.
[7] V . Garcia-Font, C. Garrigues, and H . Rifà-Pous, “A comparative study of
anomaly detection techniques for smar t city wireless sensor networks,”
Sensors, vol. 16, no. 6, p. 868, Jun. 2016.
[8] D. Zhang, B. Guo, and Z. Y u, “The emergence of social and community
intelligence,” Computer, vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 21–28, Jul. 2014.
[9] R. Ji, Y . Gao, W. Liu, X. Xie, Q. Tian, and X. Li, “When location meets
social multimedia: A survey on vision-based recognition and mining
for geo-social multimedia analytics,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. ,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–18, Mar. 2015.
[10] B. Ubaldi, “Open government data: Towards empirical analysis of open
government data initiatives,” OECD, Paris, France, Tech. Rep. 22, 2013.
[11] M. C. González, C. A. Hidalgo, and A.-L. Barabási, “Understand-
ing individual human mobility patterns,” Nature, vol. 453, no. 7196,
pp. 779–782, 2008.
[12] C. Zhuang, N. J. Y uan, R. Song, X. Xie, and Q. Ma, “Understanding
people lifestyles: Construction of urban movement knowledge graph
from GPS trajectory,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2017, pp. 3616–3623.
[ 1 3 ] W .Z h a n g ,G .Q i ,G .P a n ,H .L u ,S .L i ,a n dZ .W u ,“ C i t y - s c a l es o c i a l
event detection and evaluation with taxi traces,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst.
Technol., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 1–20, May 2015.
[14] L. Chen, D. Y ang, J. Jakubowicz, G. Pan, D. Zhang, and S. Li, “Sensing
the pulse of urban activity centers leveraging bike sharing open data,” in
Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Intell. Comput., IEEE 12th Int.
Conf. Autonomic Trusted Comput., I EEE 15th Int. Conf. Scalable Com-
put. Commun. Associated Workshops (UIC-ATC-ScalCom) , Aug. 2015,
pp. 135–142.
[15] M.-F. Chiang, E.-P . Lim, W.-C. Lee, and A. T. Kwee, “BTCI: A new
framework for identifying congestion cascades using bus trajectory
data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data) , Dec. 2017,
pp. 1133–1142.
[16] J. Zhang, “Smarter outlier detec tion and deeper understanding of large-
scale taxi trip records: A case study of NYC,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD
Int. Workshop Urban Comput. , 2012, pp. 157–162.
[17] Y . Ge, H. Xiong, Z.-H. Zhou, H. Ozdemir, J. Y u, and K. C. Lee,
“TOP-EYE: Top-k evolving trajectory outlier detection,” in Proc. 19th
ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage. , 2010, pp. 1733–1736.
[18] X. Li, Z. Li, J. Han, and J.-G. Lee, “Temporal outlier detection in
vehicle trafﬁc data,” in
Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Data Eng. , Mar. 2009,
pp. 1319–1322.
[19] Y . Wang, J. Xu, M. Xu, N. Zheng, J. Jiang, and K. Kong, “A feature-
based method for trafﬁc anomaly detection,” in Proc. 2nd ACM SIGSPA-
TIAL Workshop Smart Cities Urban Anal. , 2016, pp. 1–8.
[20] S. Y ang, K. Kalpakis, and A. Biem , “Detecting road trafﬁc events by
coupling multiple timeseries with a nonparametric Bayesian method,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 1936–1946,
Mar. 2014.
[21] I. Ceapa, C. Smith, and L. Capra, “Avoiding the crowds: Understanding
tube station congestion patterns from trip data,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD
Int. Workshop Urban Comput. , 2012, pp. 134–141.
[22] R. Mehran, A. Oyama, and M. Shah, “Abnormal crowd behavior
detection using social force model,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2009, pp. 935–942.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Politecnico di Torino. Downloaded on August 09,2026 at 09:40:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== PAGE 12 ===
DENG et al. : GRAPH CONVOLUTIONAL ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR SP A TIOTEMPORAL ANOMAL Y DETECTION 2427
[23] L. X. Pang, S. Chawla, W. Liu, and Y . Zheng, “On mining anomalous
patterns in road trafﬁc streams,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Data Mining
Appl. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2011, pp. 237–251.
[24] S. Y ang and W. Liu, “Anomaly detection on collective moving pat-
terns: A hidden Markov model based solution,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Internet Things 4th Int. Conf. Cyber , Phys. Social Comput. , Oct. 2011,
pp. 291–296.
[25] A. Witayangkurn, T. Horanont, Y . Sek imoto, and R. Shibasaki, “Anom-
alous event detection on large-scale GPS data from mobile phones
using hidden Markov model and cloud platform,” in Proc. ACM
Conf. Pervasive Ubiquitous Comput. Adjunct Publication , Sep. 2013,
pp. 1219–1228.
[26] L. Sun and K. W. Axhausen, “Understanding urban mobility pat-
terns with a probabilistic tensor factorization framework,” Transp. Res.
B, Methodol. , vol. 91, pp. 511–524, Sep. 2016.
[27] Z. Fan, X. Song, and R. Shibasaki, “CitySpectrum: A non-negative
tensor factorization approach,” in Proc. ACM Int. Joint Conf. Pervasive
Ubiquitous Comput. , Sep. 2014, pp. 213–223.
[28] C. Lin, Q. Zhu, S. Guo, Z. Jin, Y .-R. Lin, and N. Cao, “Anomaly
detection in spatiotemporal data vi a regularized non-negative tensor
analysis,” Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1056–1073,
Jul. 2018.
[29] L. Chen, J. Jakubowicz, D. Y ang, D. Zhang, and G. Pan, “Fine-grained
urban event detection and characterization based on tensor cofactoriza-
tion,” IEEE Trans. Human-Mach. Syst. , vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 380–391,
Jun. 2017.
[30] J. Wang, J. Wu, Z. Wang, F. Ga o, and Z. Xiong, “Understanding
urban dynamics via context-aware tensor factorization with neighbor-
ing regularization,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. , vol. 32, no. 11,
pp. 2269–2283, Nov. 2020.
[31] H. D. Trinh, L. Giupponi, and P . Di ni, “Urban anomaly detection by
processing mobile trafﬁc traces with LSTM neural networks,” in Proc.
16th Annu. IEEE Int. Conf. Sens., Commun., Netw. (SECON) , Jun. 2019,
pp. 1–8.
[32] M. Zhang, T. Li, H. Shi, Y . Li, and P . Hui, “A decomposition approach
for urban anomaly detection across spatiotemporal data,” in Proc. 28th
Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. , Aug. 2019, pp. 6043–6049.
[33] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. , 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
[34] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep learning for
anomaly detection: A review,” 2020, arXiv:2007.02500.
[35] T. Schlegl, P . Seeböck, S. M. Wa ldstein, U. Schmidt-Erfurth, and
G. Langs, “Unsupervised anomaly det ection with generative adversarial
networks to guide marker discovery,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Process.
Med. Imag. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2017, pp. 146–157.
[36] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P . Breckon, “Ganomaly: Semi-
supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc. Asian
Conf. Comput. Vis. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2018, pp. 622–637.
[37] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “Mad-GAN:
Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw. Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2019, pp. 703–716.
[38] S. Lee, H. G. Kim, and Y . M. Ro, “STAN: Spatio-temporal adversarial
networks for abnormal event detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.,
Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP) , Apr. 2018, pp. 1323–1327.
[39] M. Ravanbakhsh, M. Nabi, E. Sangi neto, L. Marcenaro, C. Regazzoni,
and N. Sebe, “Abnormal event detection in videos using generative
adversarial nets,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP) ,
Sep. 2017, pp. 1577–1581.
[40] Y . Zheng, H. Zhang, and Y . Y u, “D etecting collective anomalies from
multiple spatio-temporal datasets across different domains,” in
Proc.
23rd SIGSPATIAL Int. Conf. Adv. Geograph. Inf. Syst. , Nov. 2015,
pp. 1–10.
[41] D. I. Shuman, S. K. Narang, P . Frossard, A. Ortega, and
P . V andergheynst, “The emerging ﬁeld of signal processing on graphs:
Extending high-dimensional data analysis to networks and other irregular
domains,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag. , vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 83–98,
May 2012.
[42] Y . Seo, M. Defferra rd, P . V andergheynst, and X. Bresson, “Struc-
tured sequence modeling with graph c onvolutional recurrent networks,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2018,
pp. 362–373.
[43] B. Y u, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu, “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional
networks: A deep learning framework for trafﬁc forecasting,” 2017,
arXiv:1709.04875.
[44] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y . Bengio, “Empirical evaluation
of gated recurrent neural netw orks on sequence modeling,” 2014,
arXiv:1412.3555.
[45] Y . Li, R. Y u, C. Shahabi, and Y . Liu, “Diffusion convolutional
recurrent neural network: Data-d riven trafﬁc forecasting,” 2017,
arXiv:1707.01926.
[46] B. Pan, Y . Zheng, D. Wilkie, and C. Shahabi, “Crowd sensing of trafﬁc
anomalies based on human mobility and social media,” in Proc. 21st
ACM SIGSPATIAL Int. Conf. Adv. Geographic Inf. Syst. , Nov. 2013,
pp. 344–353.
[47] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining , Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
[48] P . J. Rousseeuw and K. V an Driessen, “A fast algorithm for the
minimum covariance determinant estimator,” Technometrics, vol. 41,
no. 3, pp. 212–223, Aug. 1999.
[49] M. M. Breunig, H.-P . Kriegel, R. T . Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
Data, Jun. 2000, pp. 93–104.
[50] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn. , vol. 45, no. 1,
pp. 5–32, 2001.
[51] C. A. Sims, “Macroeconomics and reality,” Econometrica, J. Econ. Soc. ,
vol. 48, pp. 1–48, Jan. 1980.
[52] J. Hamilton, Time Series Analysis . Princeton, NJ, USA: Princeton
Univ. Press, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.com.hk/
books?id=BeryDwAAQBAJ
[53] S. Guo, Y . Lin, N. Feng, C. Song, and H. Wan, “Attention based
spatial-temporal graph convolutional networks for trafﬁc ﬂow forecast-
ing,” in Proc. AAAI , vol. 33, 2019, pp. 922–929.
[54] D. P . Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
Leyan Deng received the B.S. degree in mathemat-
ics from Shandong University, Jinan, China, in 2019.
She is currently pursuing the M.E. degree with the
School of Data Science, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, China.
Her current research inte rests include anomaly
detection and spatiotemporal data mining.
Defu Lian received the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from the University of Science and Tech-
nology of China (USTC), Hefei, China, in 2014.
He is currently a Professor with the School of
Data Science, USTC. He has published proliﬁcally
in refereed journals and conference proceedings,
such as ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems
and Technology, ACM Transactions on Information
Systems, IEEE T
RANSACTION ON KNOWLEDGE
AND DATA ENGINEERING , AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( AAAI) Conference on Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence, IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM),
ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
ACM International Conference on Res earch on Development in Information
Retrieval, International Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, and ACM
International World Wide Web Conferences. His current research interests
include spatial data mining, recommender systems, and learning to hash.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Politecnico di Torino. Downloaded on August 09,2026 at 09:40:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
=== PAGE 13 ===
2428 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 33, NO. 6, JUNE 2022
Zhenya Huang received the Ph.D. degree in
computer science from the University of Science
and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China,
in 2020.
He is currently an Associate Researcher with
the School of Computer Science and Technology,
USTC. He has published several papers in referred
journals and conference proceedings, such as ACM
Transactions on Information Systems , AAAI Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Research on Development in
Information Retrieval, ACM International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, I nternational Conference on Database Systems
for Advanced Applications, and ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD). His current research interests include
recommender systems, intelligent tutorin g systems, educational data analysis,
and other related topics in data mining, representation learning, and artiﬁcial
intelligence.
Enhong Chen (Senior Member, IEEE) r eceived the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Univer-
sity of Science and Technology of China (USTC),
Hefei, China, in 1996.
He is currently a Professor and the Vice Dean of
the School of Data Science, USTC. He has pub-
lished more than 200 papers in refereed conferences
and journals, including the IEEE T
RANSACTIONS
ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING , IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING ,A C M
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (KDD), IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM),
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, and ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. His current
research interests include data mining and machine learning, social network
analysis, and recommender systems.
Dr. Chen was a recipient of the Best Application Paper Award on KDD
2008, the Best Research Paper Award on ICDM 2011, and the Best of
SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM) 2015. He was on
the program committee of numerous conferences, including KDD, ICDM,
and SDM.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Politecnico di Torino. Downloaded on August 09,2026 at 09:40:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 